Update "Writing a Custom Federated Authenticator" document (#2527)
wso2/docs-is: en/docs/develop/writing-a-custom-federated-authenticator.md

# Writing a Custom Federated Authenticator

A custom federated authenticator can be written to authenticate a user with an external system. 

> So the external system can be any Identity provider such as Facebook, Twitter, Google and Yahoo. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The external system can be any Identity provider including Facebook, Twitter, Google, and Yahoo. 
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

> It is possible to use the extension points available in the WSO2 Identity Server to create custom 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the extension points available in WSO2 Identity Server to create custom 
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

federated authenticators.

![Federated authentication diagram](../assets/img/using-wso2-identity-server/federated-authentication-diagram.png)

> ### Authenticator API

Reviewer: change all second level headers to h2.

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

The following is the API used to implement a custom federated
authenticator.

??? example "Click to view the API of the Application Authenticators"

> ``` java

Reviewer: Does this appear properly in the local? The code should be a tab spacing away to fall under an expandable.

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

This API can be used to configure a custom authenticator. As an example,
a Twitter authenticator is configured using the above API.

### Writing a custom federated authenticator

1. First create a maven project for the custom federated authenticator. Refer the [pom.xml](https://github.com/GANGANI/custom-federated-authenticator/blob/main/pom.xml) 
   file used for the sample custom federated authenticator.
2. Refer the [service component class](https://github.com/GANGANI/custom-federated-authenticator/blob/main/src/main/java/org/wso2/carbon/identity/custom/federated/authenticator/internal/CustomFederatedAuthenticatorServiceComponent.java) 

>    as well since the authenticator is written as an OSGI service to deploy in the WSO2 Identity Server and register 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   as well since the authenticator is written as an OSGI service to deploy in WSO2 Identity Server and register 
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

   it as a federated authenticator
3. The [custom federated authenticator](https://github.com/GANGANI/custom-federated-authenticator/blob/main/src/main/java/org/wso2/carbon/identity/custom/federated/authenticator/CustomFederatedAuthenticator.java) 
   should be written by extending the [AbstractApplicationAuthenticator](https://github.com/wso2/carbon-identity-framework/blob/v5.18.187/components/authentication-framework/org.wso2.carbon.identity.application.authentication.framework/src/main/java/org/wso2/carbon/identity/application/authentication/framework/AbstractApplicationAuthenticator.java) class 
   and implementing the [FederatedApplicationAuthenticator](https://github.com/wso2/carbon-identity-framework/blob/v5.18.187/components/authentication-framework/org.wso2.carbon.identity.application.authentication.framework/src/main/java/org/wso2/carbon/identity/application/authentication/framework/LocalApplicationAuthenticator.java) class.

> 4. You can find a custom federated authenticator from [here](https://github.com/GANGANI/custom-federated-authenticator) for your reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. You can find a custom federated authenticator [here](https://github.com/GANGANI/custom-federated-authenticator) for your reference
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

> The important methods in the AbstractApplicationAuthenticator class, and the FederatedApplicationAuthenticator interface are listed as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The important methods in the `AbstractApplicationAuthenticator` class, and the `FederatedApplicationAuthenticator` interface are listed as follows.
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

Implements the logic of the custom federated authenticator.

### Deploy the custom federated authenticator in WSO2 IS

1. Once the implementation is done, navigate to the root of your project and run the following command to compile the service
2. Copy the compiled jar file insider _<Custom-federated-authenticator>/target._
3. Copy the jar file **org.wso2.carbon.identity.custom.federated.authenticator-1.0.0.jar** file to the _<IS_HOME>/repository/components/dropins._

### Configure the partner identity server

In this sample the partner identity server acts as the external system. 
Therefore, that partner identity server will be running on the same machine in a different port 
by adding the following config to the deployment.toml file.

```
[server]
offset=1
```

After starting that partner identity server, it will run on [localhost:9444](https://localhost:9444/carbon).

1. Access the Management console of the partner identity server.

> 2. Then go to the Service Providers under the main tab. 

Reviewer: 2.Navigate to **Main** > **Identity** > **Service Providers** > **Add**. 
3. Add a Service Provider name and optionally, add a description. 
4. Click **Register**.

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

>    Then add Service Provider Name and register it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

>    Let’s use the playground app and refer to [this](https://is.docs.wso2.com/en/latest/learn/deploying-the-sample-app/#deploying-the-playground2-webapp) to configure the playground app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Let’s use the playground app and refer to [this](../../learn/deploying-the-sample-app/#deploying-the-playground2-webapp) to configure the playground app.
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

3. Then List the Service Providers and edit the service provider by navigation to the** 
   OAuth/OpenID Configuration** under **Inbound Authentication Configuration** and add 

>    [https://localhost:9443/commonauth](https://localhost:9443/commonauth) as the callback URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `https://localhost:9443/commonauth` as the callback URL.
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

4. Create a user **Alex** in the partner identity server.

### Configure Federated Authenticator

> To configure the federated authenticator, click the add button under **Identity Providers** and add an IDP name as 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure the federated authenticator, click the **Add** button under **Identity Providers** and add the IDP name as 
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

> **Partner-Identity-Server** and register the new IDP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Partner-Identity-Server**. Register the new IDP.
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

![Partner idp config](../assets/img/using-wso2-identity-server/partner-idp-config.png)

> Click on the **Federated Authenticators** and expand the **custom-federated-authenticator configurations** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Federated Authenticators** and expand **custom-federated-authenticator configurations** 
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

> and configure it as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Configure it as follows.
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

Here, the Client Id and Client Secret are the values of external service provider from the Partner-Identity-Server.

*   _Enable / Default - You can **enable** and set to **default**_

> *   _Authorization Endpoint UR - [https://localhost:9444/oauth2/authorize/](https://localhost:9444/oauth2/authorize/)_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   _Authorization Endpoint UR - `https://localhost:9444/oauth2/authorize/`

Please change this wherever applicable. We avoid redirecting localhost URLs. 
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

*   _Token Endpoint URL - [https://localhost:9444/oauth2/token/](https://localhost:9444/oauth2/token/)_
*   _Client Id - The value generated by the service provider of the partner IS_
*   _Client Secret - The value generated by the service provider of the partner IS_

![Federated Authenticator](../assets/img/using-wso2-identity-server/federated-authenticator.png)

### Configure an application with the custom federated authenticator

1. Start the server and log in to the WSO2 IS Management Console.

> 2. Then go to the Service Providers under the main tab. Then add Service Provider name and register it. Let’s use the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Navigate to **Main** > **Identity** > **Service Providers** > **Add**. 

3. Add a Service Provider name and optionally, add a description. 

4. Click **Register**.
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

   playground app and refer [this](https://is.docs.wso2.com/en/latest/learn/deploying-the-sample-app/#deploying-the-playground2-webapp) 
   to configure playground app.

> 3. Then List the Service Providers and edit the service provider as follows by navigation to the** OAuth/OpenID Configuration** under **Inbound Authentication Configuration **as explained above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. List the Service Providers and edit the service provider as follows by navigating to the** OAuth/OpenID Configuration** section under **Inbound Authentication Configuration ** as explained above.
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

> 4. Then click Configure and add[ http://localhost:8080/playground2/oauth2client](http://localhost:8080/playground2/oauth2client) as the call back URL. Click Update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Click Configure and add `http://localhost:8080/playground2/oauth2client` as the call back URL. Click Update.
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

> 5. Navigate to **Local & Outbound Authentication Configuration** as follows, and you can find Authentication Type. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Navigate to **Local & Outbound Authentication Configuration** as follows, and you can find the Authentication Type. 
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

   Select **Federated Authentication** and select the configured federated authenticator and update to save the changed 
   configurations.

![Partner identity provider](../assets/img/using-wso2-identity-server/partner-identity-provider.png)

### Try the scenario

> 1. Access the playground app by using[ http://localhost:8080/playground2](http://localhost:8080/playground2). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Access the playground app at `http://localhost:8080/playground2`. 
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

> 2. Then it will redirect to the login page of the application which is configured in the partner identity server which acts as the external service. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. This will redirect to the login page of the application which is configured in the partner identity server which acts as the external service. 
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

> 3. Give Alex's username and password (The user was created, in the partner identity server). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Enter Alex's username and password (The user was created in the partner identity server). 
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f

> 4. Then the federated authentication can be experienced since the Alex is authenticated from the partner Identity Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Now Alex will be authenticated by the partner Identity Server.
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/wso2/docs-is/pull/2527/commits/ffc80dd6ac9088892baa7c56e5f03a9aa0768d3f
